# Interview
MUSI 3770 Project Studio - Assignment 3: Interviews in Music Technology

## Interview with Songwriter, Producer, Artist Manager, and Performer Monty Powell
#### Author: Joseph Taylor, Date: Nov. 11th, 2021

Monty Powell is a respected songwriter, producer, and performer who has written songs for artists such as Keith Urban, Diamond Rio, Tim McGraw, Chris Cagle, Lady A, Rascal Flatts, and Brooks & Dunn among others. His career within the music business spans over 35 years and, through his work, he has received a 2013 Golden Globe Award Nomination for Best Original Song in a Motion Picture as well as a 2013 Critics Choice Award nomination for the song “For You” from the movie Act of Valor, a nomination for CMA Song of the Year in 2006 for the song “Tonight I Wanna Cry”, named SESAC’s Country Songwriter of the Year in 2009, and won a CMA Triple Play Award in 2010 for writing three separate #1 songs all within the same year. Aside from his long list of songwriting credentials, Mr. Powell has also produced albums in conjunction with Billy Joel, Keith Urban, Diamond Rio, Kenny Rogers, Olivia Newton-John, and The Oak Ridge Boys. Due to these relationships forged as both an accomplished songwriter and producer, Mr. Powell’s accomplishments are extensive, to say the least!

### Interview with Monty Powell:
#### 1. What is your position/job title, and what would you say are your key roles and responsibilities?
  I am an independent songwriter and record producer, and my key responsibilities are to write songs for my own artist career, which comes through the vehicle of a duo that I have with my wife called Troubadour 77. I also continue to write for the broader music business for other artists.
  
#### 2. Since you initially attended college at Lipscomb University in Nashville to become a lawyer, how were you initially introduced to the music business? 
  I thought I wanted to be an attorney because I thought of that as a job and music as a hobby. However, when I got to Nashville, it was such a shock to come to the realization that there was a music business there and that you could work without having to be an “Elvis”. You could work hard and actually attain success through business channels. If I would have gone to college anywhere other than in Nashville, I would never have discovered the music business. Additionally, it was also a complete coincidence that one of my college roommates was Marty Roe, who later became the lead singer of Diamond Rio. We just wound up in a dorm room together. He was a singer, and I was a guitar player and singer, and there was no premeditation of us meeting whatsoever. It was luck!

#### 3. What was your first job within Nashville’s music industry?
  Marty and I both got placed into shows at Opryland, which was a theme park back in the day in Nashville, and both of our professional gigs as musicians were working in these summer shows at the theme park. That really cemented the beginnings of our careers in the music business together.

#### 4. I know you wrote some jingles for commercials early on in your career. Did that mark the next step in your career after working at Opryland?
  Yes. That was just a one-summer thing, but it was professional. Since it was a paid job, it was really like dipping your toe in the water. A guy that I knew was working in the jingle industry, and he asked me to come and play guitar on a jingle. However, when I initially got into the jingle business, I was a salesman. I wasn’t writing music. But I knew that if I just hung around long enough, I would get my chance to be creative. Sure enough, a year into that job, both principal songwriters were gone, and somebody called in from Ohio to get a song written for a client immediately. So, I called my boss and asked for a shot at writing the jingle. I had never written anything, but they knew I desperately wanted to try my hand at songwriting. Luckily, they said, “Have at it!” So, I wrote the jingle, and the client bought it. From then on out, I was just considered part of the creative team. And since I also had to produce these jingles, very early on, I got super comfortable in the production chair and managing a room full of studio musicians. It was a great training ground for me to learn how to become a producer. At the same time, since I had access to the studio, I would record demos of the songs that I was writing for the industry. So being in the jingle business for a while was a really great opportunity for me because I learned how to produce and produce under pressure. I tell people all the time, “If you circle the music industry long enough, eventually an opening and opportunity for you will present itself.”

#### 5. After writing commercial jingles, what came next for you in your career?
  I had produced enough demos in the studio where I was making jingles that I was able to go and take a few publishing meetings. The first publishing meeting that I ever took, I was offered a writing job at Warner Chapel. With this first batch of demos, I was able to quit the jingle business, become a full-time songwriter, and reconnect with Marty Roe and his band, which eventually became Diamond Rio. We both assumed the band would never go anywhere unless we were able to write our own original songs. So, we were both able to retool the band together in order to get them a record deal with Arista Records. When I began working with them, they didn’t even have a name. However, working with Diamond Rio was absolutely my ticket to meeting other performing artists. The first record we made for them went platinum, they won CMA vocal group of the year three years in a row, and their first single went to number one. It was one of those fantastic stories where we worked hard, worked harder, and it all fell into place.

#### 6. What is it like producing albums for other artists? Are you focused more on the technological side of recording and production whereas the artist focuses mainly on the actual songwriting?
  That is something that has changed so much over my career. Generally, artists are not going to be very tech-focused or tech-oriented. They tend to think about their performance, image, how they want to position themselves, and what they want to say to the world. Clearly, that has changed within the past ten years. There are now artists that do what I do. They do everything! However, back in the day, with someone like Keith Urban, he wouldn’t have been able to choose the right type of mic or preamp to use. However, he was and still is, extremely hands-on with his guitars and amps. His focus was on making himself and his guitars sound good, whereas my focus was centered on capturing Keith and his music and capturing it well.

#### 7. What is your favorite microphone to use?
  My favorite mic is the Neumann 67. Want to know my second favorite? It’s the SM7! It’s the mic you’re listening to on so many records when you think you’re listening to a 67 or a Sony 800. I can’t tell you the number of people who are in fact singing with an SM7.

#### 8. What does a typical workday or workweek look like for you?
  That’s a tough question to answer. I don’t really have a typical workday, but I do have a sort of typical workflow. On the days that I am working on music, it is generally either a writing session, which consists of crafting a song from scratch in two hours, or it is a session to create music around a song that already exists. So, I’m either generally wearing my songwriter hat or my producer hat on any given day.

#### 9. What are some of the primary software tools you use as a songwriter and producer?
  When it comes to the tools I use for songwriting and producing, they’re all the same. I am a Cubase and Steinberg endorsee. The DAW I use is Cubase. I’ve never owned Pro Tools. My platform has always come up through the Steinberg/Yamaha side of things. So that’s what I work with every day. I also work very closely with a company called Toontrack. I do endorsement work for them, and they make EZdrummer, EZbass, EZkeys, Superior Drummer, and those are the core sets of apps that I use as VSTis to create because I am a one-man-band. I engineer, play, mix, produce, and master everything. I essentially craft everything myself from top to bottom.

#### 9. How did you get your start with Keith Urban?
  Keith Urban had made a little noise by having a record deal with Warner Brothers in Australia, and they knew he could become a superstar. Due to the limited market found in Australia, they “upstreamed” him to Warner Brothers in Nashville. In the first couple of meetings Keith had with Warner Brother’s Records, they told him to pick a producer. However, since he didn’t know anyone in Nashville at the time, they gave him a list of producers they thought might be good for him. Luckily, I happened to be on the list. He showed up at my office one day, and during our first meeting, we decided to begin working together on an album called Keith Urban in the Ranch. That was the first album I produced for him.

#### 10. When producing the song “For You” for the movie Act of Valor, did you find the realm of film production to be any different than what you most normally do within general music production?
  It was a little different. After they finished the movie, they sent it to Keith and me to look at with no music, which was a bit bizarre. That normally doesn’t happen, but they specifically asked us to watch the movie and write a song that reflects the movie’s story to be played over the credits. I like knowing what I’m writing for and writing about because it makes the process easier, so that worked out well. These days, almost everything I do is targeted writing. It usually consists of me either doing something for some corporate entity where they want me to write something to capture their message or with a specific artist who is the primary target of my song. I almost never sit down and write a song with no target artist in mind. So, in the case of “For You”, that songwriting process was actually not too out of the ordinary for me.

#### 11. What was it like producing the album Common Thread: The songs of the Eagles, and how did that process work since there were multiple artists collaborating on a single record?
  Most of those compilation projects have multiple producers simply because a lot of those artists only want to write with their own separate production teams. I have essentially created a niche for myself by doing those types of albums, such as Common Thread and Mama’s Hungry Eyes: A Tribute to Merle Haggard. My wife, Anna Wilson, and I also worked with Billy Joel for three years as executive producers on an album called Nashville State of Mind. Overall, compilation albums rarely tend to only have a sole producer.

#### 12. What advice would you have for someone pursuing a career path like yours today?
  Whether it’s Cubase, Pro Tools, Logic, or Reaper, learn a DAW that you love, and learn it inside and out. You are dead in the water if you don’t also have a technological path that runs parallel to your creative path. That’s a relatively new occurrence, but it is extremely critical to know everything you can about the technological side of music production today. If you take the time to do so, you won’t regret it!

#### Many thanks to Monty Powell for sharing tips as well as his experiences from his time in Nashville’s music industry. To learn more about Mr. Powell and his work, please visit his website: http://www.montypowell.com
Published with permission from Monty Powell on Nov. 11th, 2021.
 
